---
layout: default
title : "Closest Point Method"
tag: math 
---
## Contents
[Intro](#introduction)
[The Method](#the-method)

### Introduction 

The closest point method (CPM) is a method that is used and developed by the applied math community in solving PDEs on surfaces and this is just my notes on the method to help me understand. These notes will be based on the paper written by Steven J. Ruuth and Barry Merriman. The original paper can be found [here](https://steveruuth.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/cpm08.pdf)

The following is the paper's abstract
> It is increasingly common to encounter partial differential equations (PDEs) posed on surfaces, and standard numerical methods are not available for such novel situations. Here we develop a simple method for the numerical solution of such equations which embeds the problem within a Cartesian analog of the original equation, posed on the entire space containing the surface. This allows the immediate use of familiar finite difference methods for the discretization and numerical solution. The particular simplicity of our approach results from using the
closest point operator to extend the problem from the surface to the surrounding space. The resulting method is quite general in scope, and in particular allows for boundary conditions at surface boundaries, and immediately generalizes beyond surfaces embedded in R3, to objects of any dimension embedded in any Rn. The procedure is also computationally efficient, since the computation is naturally only carried out on a grid near the surface of interest. We present the motivation and details of the method, illustrate its numerical convergence properties for
model problems, and also illustrate its application to several complex model equations.

The CPM sets out to be a method that overcomes a lot of the limitations of previous methods; those of which include parametrization, the use of level-set methods, or to solve the PDE directly on a triangulation of the surface(meshes). The main difference between the CPM and the other methods is that it abandons the level-set method that was used previously and instead uses a closest point representation of the surface. 

### The Method

There is a need to "rapidly and accurately extend functions defined on surfaces" to the space around the surface. The extension will be chosen such that the embedding "PDE" is a "natural extension of the original". This means that the embedding PDE will be formed by "replacing intrinsic surface gradients with standard gradients on R3". This extension will not be accurate for very long times but if the extension is chosen correctly the "evolution of the embedding PDE will be accurate initially". The requirement of time leads to a specific class of extension operators, specifically the extension operators that extend "function values to be constant along directions normal to the surface". 

On such "constant normal extension" is the closest point representation. In short, the closest point representation function -- cp(x) -- is a function that takes a point (x) in R3 and returns the closest point to x on the surface S. With the closest point representation function we can define the extension operator to be 

E(us)(x) = u(cp(x))

for any u defined on S. This extension operator is rather simple because the funcion cp is simply a map from R3 to R3 and returns points on S. 

The advantages of the closest point function are the following: 
* the ability to work with open and closed surfaces
* flexibility to work with surfaces with no orientation(i.e. Klein bottle)
* works on curves/filaments -- objects of co-dimension two or higher 

The closest point function can be found in a number of ways: 
1. for surfaces like the sphere/torus it can be found analytically 
2. parametrized surfaces it can be found by using standard numberical optimization techniques
3. for triangulated surfaces it can be found directly or through the use of algorithms such as the "tree-based algorithms of Strain" or the "public domain closest point transfom of Mauch"
